# LC-MS Phenotypic Variation Detector

This project is designed to process LC-MS results, specifically those analyzed by MaxQuant, to detect amino acid substitutions within proteins, potentially caused by mutations, transcription errors, translation errors, or post-translational modifications (PTMs). The pipeline uses data files generated by MaxQuant and requires that the same or compatible FASTA files be used for both MaxQuant and this Python pipeline to ensure consistent identifiers.
This project builds upon the methodologies described in the [2019 publication on PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31353208/).

## Key Features

- **Phenotypic Variation Detection**: Automatically detects and identifies amino acid substitutions in protein sequences.
- **Comprehensive Results**: Outputs a detailed table listing all detected phenotypic variations along with intensity ratios, providing a quantitative measure of each variation.
- **Enhanced Performance**: Offers improved speed and accuracy compared to previous implementations, making it a valuable tool for extensive datasets.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites
- Ensure MaxQuant is installed and configured on your system. For detailed instructions on running MaxQuant, refer to `MAXQUANT_README.md`.
- Python 3.8 or higher is required, along with additional libraries specified in `requirements.txt`.

### Configuring MaxQuant
Run MaxQuant with your LC-MS data, using `dependent peptides` search (more details at `MAXQUANT_README.md`). The following outputs from MaxQuant are required:
- `dependentPeptides.txt`
- `peptides.txt`

Make sure the FASTA file used in MaxQuant contains the same identifiers as the FASTA file used in this Python pipeline.

### Installation of the piepline
```bash
git lfs install
git lfs clone https://github.com/t3hi1a/detectAminoAcidSubstitutions.git
cd detectAminoAcidSubstitutions
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Configuring the Python Pipeline
Modify the `config.ini` file to point to the correct paths where your input files are stored. 

Parameters Explanation:
- `dependentpeptides_file`: Path to dependentPeptides.txt generated by MaxQuant.
- `peptides_file`: Path to peptides.txt generated by MaxQuant.
- `dna_file`: Path to the DNA FASTA file used for analysis, must match the gene identifiers used in MaxQuant.
- `proteins_file`: Path to the protein FASTA file, must match the gene identifiers used in MaxQuant.
- `output_dir`: Directory where the output results will be stored.

### Running the Pipeline
To run the pipeline, navigate to your project directory and execute main.py from the command line:

```bash
python main.py
```
This will process the input files according to the configurations set in `config.ini` and output the results to the directory specified.

### Results
After running the scripts, the output will be stored in the results directory. You can compare these results with the example results provided in this directory to verify correct execution.



